Title: Hotel Regency


Overview: This project entailed creating an interactive text-based hotel system in Python using Object Oriented Programming. The system is modelled after a hotel management system, where guests can inquire about room availability and can check in and out of rooms. The hotel has a total of 22 rooms, which are updated when guests check in and check out. The hotel offers a variety of room types, including single, double, and suites. There are also subtypes, such as standard rooms without a view and deluxe rooms with a view. A guest can make a reservation based on specific criteria such as the number of people, length of stay, and room type.


Guest Class: The parent class in this case is Guest class. The class's __init__ method is where the attributes are defined. The initializer method, __init__, is called as soon as the object "Guest" is created. The initialiser method has 3 parameters: Name, Date of Birth and Phone number. Additionally, we have defined a global incrementor called "GuestUniqueID counter" that creates a unique ID for each guest who checks in. Other than the initialiser method, we have defined six other methods in the Guest class: ' set_guest_details', 'check_in', 'enquire_Room', 'check_out', 'get_invoice', 'print_name_DOB'. ‘set_guest_details’ method is used to record name, date of birth and phone number of the guest while making a booking. 'check_in' method has 2 parameters: 'roomNo' and 'bookingdays'. These parameters are used to record the room in which the guest wants to stay and the number of days, the guest is going to stay in the hotel while the guest checks in, in the hotel. ‘enquire_Room’ has 4 parameters. First is the Hotel class which contains details related to the hotel. Second parameter is ‘numberofPeople’ that are going to stay in one room and the default value is set to none which means the user will select the value. Third parameter is the ‘lengthofStay’ and the default value is set to none. The last parameter is ‘withView’. It asks user if they want a standard room (without view) or a deluxe room (with view). The default value of this parameter is set to no. ‘check_out’ method has just one parameter which is ‘roomNo’. The user will give his room number and he will be checked out of that room and the room will become available for the next guest.  ‘get_invoice’ is the method that gives invoice to the user when the user checks out of his hotel room. ‘print_name_DOB’ is method to print name and date of birth of the user while booking a room. 


VIP Class: VIP is the child class which inherits the functions of the parent class. A child class is a modification of a parent class. We can say this because the VIP class added a new attribute, 'vip,' to the initialiser method. It asks users whether they are VIP guests or not so that they can take advantage of certain benefits. We also used the super() function inside the __init__() method to run the parent class's __init__() method inside the child class.


Room Class: Room class is used to define the features of the hotel rooms and their prices. We have created a nested dictionary in python to define room prices. The rooms are divided into three categories: Single, Double and Suit. These are further divided into two sub-categories: Standard (without a view) and Deluxe (With View). The price of single standard room is £40, single deluxe room is £60. Price of double standard room is £80 and double deluxe is £100. Price of suite standard is £100 and suite deluxe is £120. The initialiser method in the room class has 3 parameters: ‘roomType’, ‘roomFeature’, ‘MaxlengthOfStay’. ‘roomType’ defines the type of the room i.e., single, double and suit. ‘roomFeature’ defines the quality of the room based on whether the room has view or not i.e., standard and deluxe. ‘MaxlengthOfStay’ defines the maximum number of days, a user can book the room. Room class has one more method called ‘get_roomPrice’. It is a method to get room prices based on pre-defined criteria.  It has two attributes: ‘lengthofStay’ and ‘guestType’. ‘lengthofStay’ is number of days the guest is staying in the hotel and ‘guestType’ defines if the guest is VIP or not. This method returns the price of the room based on the length of the stay and the guest type. VIP guest can avail 10% discount on their booking. 


Hotel Class: Hotel class contains all the details regarding rooms and the guests. It is also responsible for displaying the available rooms, check ins, check outs, issuing invoices. The initializer method has 2 parameters that defines the hotel name and the hotel address. The ‘add_Room’ method is used to add individual rooms to the list of available rooms. Another ‘add_Rooms’ method is defined to iteratively add or multiply rooms with a pre-defined set of properties. The ‘roomType’ parameter in this method is used to give certain types of rooms such as single, double and suit. ‘roomFeature’ describes if the room is with view or without a view such as standard and deluxe. ‘maxlengthofStay’ describes the maximum days a room can be booked in the hotel and ‘noOfRoomsToAdd’ is used for iteration every time a guest checks in and checks out of the hotel room. ‘process_checkin’ method facilitate room check in process for a guest. The parameters are defined as: ‘guest’ that is checking in the hotel, ‘roomNo’ tells the number of the room which is allocated to the guest. ‘enteredNumberOfDays’ is the total number of days a guest has stayed in the hotel. ‘process_checkout’ method facilitate room check out process for a guest. It has just one parameter ‘roomNo’ which tells room number in which the guest has stayed. ‘issue_invoices’ method is defined for generating invoices for the guest who has checked out of their room. The ‘roomNo’ parameter in this method is the allocated room and ‘bookingdays’ parameter is the length of the stay. Another method in the hotel class is ‘display_rooms’. It is used for displaying list of rooms for the basis of search criteria. ‘numberOfPeople’, ‘lengthOfStay’ and ‘withView’ are the parameters in this method. The default value of ‘withView’ is set to ‘No’. ‘search_guest’ method checks if the guest has already checked in the hotel or not. Guest’s name and date of birth are the only two parameters in this method. 


Main Script: The main script imports all of these classes. It requires user input to guide the programme through all of the options, such as 1) Search available rooms. 2) Check in, 2) Check out. We want this application to function in such a way that the user selects one of the above-mentioned options and makes a reservation by answering a few questions. The user will select the first option in the general structure of this main script. The user will then be prompted to enter the number of people staying in a room, the length of the stay, and the room's features (with or without view). The user will then be asked to choose the second option, Check in. The user must first select the room number in which they wish to stay, their date of birth, phone number, the number of days of stay, the number of people staying, and the guest type (VIP guest or not). VIP guest can avail 10% discount. The check-in process will be completed after the user have answered all of the required questions. The final step is to check out of the room. To begin the check-out process, the user will be prompted to enter the room number, date of birth, and name. The program will compare these details to the information provided during check-in. If the program locates the guest, an invoice is generated, and the room is added to the list of available rooms. If the program is unable to locate the guest, the message 'Guest not found, please enter valid details' will be displayed. In order to handle errors, we built our program to verify each input, allowing the user to re-enter it if necessary.
 
